bro what's up dude you're a software
engineer right yeah what exactly do you
do like what exactly is coding software
engineers build software by writing code
when somebody says that they're coding
they're essentially taking a programming
language a common one such as python or
java and then they're putting together a
bunch of tiny building blocks to create
a bigger piece of software kind of like
how when you're building a house you're
essentially laying down a bunch of tiny
little bricks together but at the end
you get a house some common building
blocks in programming languages are
conditional statements which only
execute a certain piece of code if a
certain condition is met or loops which
allow you to repeat a certain action
over and over again for a certain number
of times when you put together all these
building blocks over and over again you
can eventually build a really big piece
of software kind of like this app that
you're watching this video on right now