I was the 19th engineer to join WhatsApp
we may have had around 20 million users
at the time and by the time I was
leaving the company we had 1.2 billion
active monthly users I've been working
in tech for 17 years so over the years I
probably work with thousands of
Engineers every single person wants some
kind of influence it could be influence
in terms of I want to get a promotion
that's a form of influence you want to
influence your manager or I want to get
a different job so that's part of our
curriculum
influence and we say influence is about
likability and credibility when I ask
Peter I know Peter will deliver ex I
know he's dependable and he's not going
to make me feel like he's not going
to be an and he's going to be
pleasant to work with so like ability
plus credibility can bring you a lot of
influence people will come to you for
New Opportunities if I'm building a new
startup I'm thinking about who do I want
on my team they're going to think of
people who have the like ability and The
credibility together because if you only
have one or the other you're okay you
might be able to tag along but you're
not going to be the first person they
think of so I do recommend okay even if
you are really good at all of them
please choose one what is your thing
what do you want to be known for as I
started getting more involved with
YouTube I've been watching more content
that it drives me crazy when I see these
videos like top five Trends or top five
languages to follow because I don't
think that's what really will help you
be successful it's not about which
language you know because as a hiring
manager I'm often trying to just
understand are you a smart engineer can
you code because what languages we're
using today may not be applicable
tomorrow so I want to be able to work
with people who can learn new things
pick up new skills and that's what I'm
interviewing for when I talk to new
software Engineers similar principles
apply to success blindly following
Trends is recipe for failure because
you're you're always going to be a step
behind so I encourage people to be
inquisitive and explore your passions
what are you good at what do you enjoy
doing and follow
that at whatsapp we actually had a note
written by one of the founders we wrote
no gimmicks and we had it posted on the
walls we decided we're not going to do
games we're not going to do gimmicks
we're not going to throw in bunch of
feates just to appease every single
person the way we are going to appease
every single person is by focusing on
the core utility features like does the
messaging actually work can you call
someone and can you actually hear them I
guess another word you can say is we
focused on quality we wanted to drill in
to make sure it worked every single time
rather than adding on a bunch of new
features we would get a lot of emails
from people all over the world and they
would tell us there was a natural
disaster nothing was working the phone
lines were down but I was able to use
what WhatsApp to call the firefighters
and I was rescued or I was in a car
accident and I was rescued so I do
believe it worked so when I was in
college I actually interned for a
threepers startup and we had a lot of
fun I loved the ownership the autonomy I
could really see the impact of my work I
also felt like we were lacking Direction
and Leadership and mentorship and that's
part of the reason why I joined IBM and
when I did join IBM I felt like there
was great mentorship but I lacked the
autonomies so WhatsApp for me struck a
balance because at the time I was the
19th engineer it was small enough where
I could see the impact of the work but
the founders had a lot of experience
they were both from Yahoo They had a lot
of experience working in Tech and I felt
like that would be a great balance for
me to find both ownership and mentorship
and it's not like we had one-on-one
every week it wasn't a formal mentorship
but just by being there in a small
company and observing and watching
similar to my upbringing I guess just
learning how they operate how they lead
was a really great opportunity for me
and I learned so much by just being
there we may have had around 20 million
users at the time and by the time I was
leaving the company we had 1.2 billion
active monthly users there were several
values I think that was key to the
success of WhatsApp and as we
experienced the growth I think it was
really important to be able to hold on
to our engineering culture and that was
part of my big Focus as well when I was
starting the new office in London I went
there in 2018 we grew the office to
about 100 engineers in a couple of years
and in that short period of time we were
hiring new Engineers every week and one
thing that we tried to really do was to
make sure that everyone understands the
engineering culture for WhatsApp I think
was pretty special and if I were to sum
up the WhatsApp engineering culture in
one word it's challenging but I would
say it was simplicity so simp Simplicity
can mean a lot of different things but
one way of achieving Simplicity is
really prioritizing it's easy for us to
say I'm going to do 10 different things
and be really great at it but it's
actually much harder to be focused on
few core features and few core offerings
that we will offer and prioritize them
ruthlessly we had a clear decision maker
who gave us clear messaging about which
features we're going to deliver and we
came up with with these features really
intentionally as well we had ideas like
okay we want to make sure even someone
in the middle of nowhere with bad
internet connection on an old device
should be able to use our app so we
wanted to prioritize the user experience
so even people in remote places with
body internet connection on older
devices can use our app also we like to
talk about can a grandma in the middle
of nowhere use this feature and that was
our guiding princip principle for how we
prioritize our work we made sure that
every single person understood what
we're building and where we're going and
I also implemented that in my personal
team as engineering manager as well I
let people know these are the things
that we're building and this is our
long-term overall goal so when they are
working I can't always be there to hold
their hand and guide them but when
they're working they can prioritize
their own work when they have competing
projects or features or priorities they
can say the these are our guiding values
or priorities and I know exactly which
one I need to prioritize and it would
work also when you're working cross
functionally if someone's asking you for
help or giving you new ideas or
suggestions you understand what needs to
be done for not just yourself but for
your team and a company as a whole so
achieving Simplicity through
prioritizing was one of the key factors
for success for
us when WhatsApp got acquired for $19
billion I actually wasn't even sure what
a billion dollars was the type of amount
of money that you can't really tangibly
describe how much is a billion dollars
the moment that I heard the acquisition
news I was sitting in the conference
room it was really weird the founders
looked a little weird I couldn't
articulate at the time because I didn't
know what was happening but they're like
waving their arms and like saying you
need to get into this conference room I
couldn't believe my ears I wasn't sure
what was happening but when I heard the
news Okay Facebook's buying us for $19
billion and I was sitting in the
conference room thinking how much is
that and what does that mean for me like
I was pretty young at the time so I
didn't know how much shares I actually
exactly had and I wasn't really sure
what that meant for me and I was trying
to calculate the number what does that
mean for me and I couldn't do the math
so yeah it was an incredible opportunity
and it was really exciting to be there
and it does really change your life
there are many things money can change
change or doesn't change as well it can
bring you certain fulfillment and
stability but there's a lot more that we
need beyond that what do you want to do
if you don't work yeah you can stay home
watch TV but after a while TV is kind of
boring so I think it's about how you
view your I don't feel like I'm working
I'm just having fun that's why you need
to find something that's interesting for
you right why does Bill Gates work he's
still doing so much he's working all the
time but I don't know Bill Gates and I
don't know why he's working but I was
suspect most of these people who
continue to work they don't see it as
work they see it as a meaningful part of
their life I think it was a turning
point for my life because I was never
financially free growing up so having
the Financial Freedom was a little bit
confusing at times I did have to go
experiment a lot and explore again to
redefine the meaning of work for myself
to understand how do I want to spend my
time