if I wanted to land a software
engineering internship in 2025 this is
exactly what I would do now the absolute
first thing that I would do is make sure
I start preparing early getting in the
habit of doing maybe one lead code
question a day fine-tuning my resume
taking my time with it and not cramming
last minute and just making sure I was
aware of what the interview cycle
actually looked like and what was
expected me for junior Developer jobs or
for internships I made this mistake back
in 2020 when I landed my first
internship of not really preparing in
until I had my first job interview lined
up in fact I got my first screening call
and I had never even done a leak code
question I was fortunate enough to be
able to pass it and then I spent the
next month absolutely cramming being
super stressed spending hours upon hours
every single day prepping so I was able
to land a job at Microsoft now that
worked out for me but that's definitely
not what I would recommend so if I could
go back I would really get in the habit
of preparing for interviews super early
I'm talking about months before they
came up making sure my resume was ready
I had some great project set up and that
way when it came time to start sending
out applications and eventually getting
those interviews I was already prepared
and I just needed to do some last minute
brush up rather than stressing and
cramming like so many people do so if
you're watching this video and you do
want to land an internship I would do
The Following start doing at least one
leak code or hacker rank or kind of
interview style question every single
day make sure your resume is ready look
at it over a few days send it to some
friends make sure that it's super
polished and prepare your program in
projects and make sure they're ready to
go and they're clean so that when you do
really get into the high season of
interviewing and sending out
applications all you have to do is that
you don't need to do all of the other
preparation work which really is
extremely timec consuming now speaking
of preparing I've actually been working
on something for the past month now
behind the scenes and I'm going to be
releasing it in just a few days now this
is going to be much more of a one-on-one
kind of mentorship program I really want
to take some people under my wing help
them land these type of positions and
give them that more guided one-on-one
support that I know a lot of you need
now initially I'm just going to be
opening up 10 spots this is the first
time I've done something like this so I
want to make sure it's extremely
valuable for a really limited group of
people and I'm opening a weit list for
it right now so if you do want to join
the weit list and be informed when it
does go live then click the link in the
description down below and as a thank
you for filling out the little form that
I have there I'm going to give you
access to an unlisted video which shares
a bunch of Secrets and raw realities of
becoming a software engineer and really
how to level up your career in 2025
anyways I'm excited about this program
again it's only going to be for 10
people so if you do want to get on it
join that weit list from the link below
with that said let's continue and talk
about how to land that internship all
right so the next thing I would really
want to focus on is building two really
solid programming projects now I say two
because you want to focus on quality
over quantity and it doesn't help you to
have six seven eight different
programming projects on your resume
companies want to see that you're able
to build something and that you can do
this on your own and make something
impactful you don't need tons of
different projects to Showcase that you
just need one or two really well done
ones to demonstrate that you do
understand what software engineering is
you know how to build software and
ideally you can build something that
actually solves a real world problem so
I'm going to give you some tips here to
focus on for your programming projects
and especially as an entry level
engineer these are so important and they
can really help you stand out and be a
great talking point during your
interview okay so let's get into it the
first thing is that this project needs
to solve a problem everyone's seen the
Sorting algorithm visualizers or the
to-do list apps you need to try to build
something unique and ideally something
that relates to you or someone that you
know with that in mind you also want to
try to have your project have at least
one user that's not you if you can have
other people using what you've built
even if it's just one person like your
mom or dad or brother or a friend of
yours that really shows that you're
putting the user first which is
something we do all the time in software
development so try to get someone else
to use your project or build it around a
particular use case for them so that way
you can really talk about all of the
challenges related to the user and how
you built specific functionality
features how you collected feedback all
of those important Concepts which
companies are looking for beyond that
your project needs to be easily
accessible if I have to download a ton
of software or run some complicated
script or it's buggy or difficult for me
to open I'm just not going to look at it
ideally it should be a website link you
click it it opens up and it's a oneclick
install or a oneclick view that's what
companies are looking for and that's
probably the only way they're actually
going to view the programming project
you have now lastly it needs to have
some kind of wow factor and be
professionally done if I go to your
website the first thing I should think
is oh this is interesting I haven't seen
this before let me keep looking you have
to hook someone immediately and you can
do that with the description of the
project or what they see immediately
when they open it up make it something
interesting make it something unique and
make sure that when I view it I don't
think this was made by a junior level
software ER try to make something that's
super impressive right really focus on
the quality here and ensure that if
someone does view this project they're
immediately impressed if you have one or
two of these on your resume I promise
this will help you a ton and again you
can really come back to these as talking
points during your interview and
demonstrate that you do know the skills
for the job based on what you achieved
with these various projects so now that
we've got the projects out of the way
it's time to put them on a resume and I
would focus on really making sure that
my resume is absolutely perfect here
because this is one thing that you have
unlimited time for and there's really no
excuse for it being bad now I can tell
you firsthand I have reviewed hundreds
of rums a lot of people send them to me
to review or because they were applying
for my startup previously and most of
them are absolutely horrible I made an
entire video on this which I will link
here but here are a few quick tips to
keep in mind for the resume so that
yours isn't as bad as a lot of the other
ones that I reviewed now first of all no
spelling mistakes no grammatical errors
make sure that the English is perfect if
English isn't your first language use AI
send this to people that do know English
really well and get five six seven
people to audit your resume and really
review it as much as you possibly can
next make sure that you don't have any
irrelevant experience no one cares if
you worked at McDonald's or you were the
captain of the football team back in
high school and get rid of all that
stuff having it on your resume really
just makes you look like an amateur and
it would be significantly better to show
those two programming projects earlier
up on the resume rather than
highlighting some irrelevant experience
at some random job that has nothing to
do with software development next for
all of your resumé points you want to
put them in the following format some
kind of action you took some kind of
task or responsibility you had and then
some outcome or some impact that you
achieved ideally that's quantifiable let
me give you an example here of a great
resume point I developed and deployed a
scalable e-commerce platform for a
client integrating payment gateways and
thirdparty apis resulting in a 40%
increase in online sales within 3 months
see that it says what you did the type
of responsibility or task that you had
and the impact ideally quantifiable in
this case 40% increase in online sales
within 3 months if you can do that it's
going to make the seam a lot more
professional and demonstrate that the
work you're doing actually does
something and has real world impact now
lastly it's important to adjust your
resume based on the type of roles that
you're applying for I'm not saying you
need to change this for every single
application but a lot of times you will
have automatic scanners or the ATS
systems that are checking your resumés
so make sure you put all of the keywords
that are included in things like the job
listing if you're applying for a backend
rooll and then you apply for a front end
roll obviously tweak your resume
accordingly and make sure that you put
the different Technologies tools skills
all of that kind of stuff so you pass
that automatic scanning and ideally
actually get viewed by human so many
people just make the resume once and
they never adjust it that's a huge
mistake you can constantly tweak it and
especially things like the list of
skills you can modify that and uh kind
of change that based on the positions
you're applying to so while I'm
preparing I've got my programming
projects done and my resume is now solid
and ready to go I'm going to be focusing
on networking and building meaningful
connections now yes we obviously want to
get referrals we want to try to network
with hiring managers and recruiters and
all of those decision makers at
companies but that's easier said than
done so I'm going to give you some more
practical advice here which really
worked well for me and I don't see a lot
of people talking about now this is just
actually try to make friends with other
aspiring software developers people that
are maybe classmates of yours if you're
in something like a computer science
program maybe people you meet at
hackathons even people online and forums
stuff like that just try to actually
make friends get to know people be
charismatic and build a real
relationship most of the jobs that I've
actually been offered now especially as
I get a little bit older outside of
school have come from friends of mine
people that I knew during school people
that I met at some kind of event even if
we're not super close since they know
I'm in software development they
immediately reach out to me whenever
they have some kind of position or they
know that some opportunity opens up and
as well as that I also get to hear all
of the insights that they have and hear
what jobs they're Landing where they're
working how they were able to get an
internship what their interviews are
like the type of questions they got
asked and all of that really does help
you land positions in the future so make
sure that you are networking with as
many people as possible as much as you
want to go up to the people that already
have experience and can maybe hire you
or give you a referral also the people
that are trying to do the same thing as
you are important to get to know because
there's a lot of tips and insights you
guys can share with each other and I
promise you the more people you know
trying to do this the more you're going
to learn about it and the more you're
going to see what's working and what's
not working from Real World Experience
from all of these people you know so
once I did all that I would then focus
on putting out a ton of volume when it
comes to number of applications with
this strategy in mind now I would
personally be targeting at least 10
applications per day probably more than
that realistically like as many as I
could do consistently every single day
but I would focus on the following first
of all I would try my best to get soft
Ros and referrals now getting a proper
formal referral is pretty difficult so
if you can even just get some kind of
email introduction if someone can
connect you the hiring manager or just
any human being at the company your
chances immediately increase because now
you're actually talking to a human and
you've got past all of the AI all of the
screening all of that kind of stuff
that's really the main goal here you
want to get in touch with humans as
quickly as you possibly can I know
that's difficult but it does drastically
increase your chances now I also would
be focusing on applying to more smaller
companies startups midsize companies and
not really going for a ton of big Tech
now sure big Tech is fine to apply to
but your chance of getting a big Tech
interview really is just like searching
for a needle in a Hy stack you have to
be extremely lucky you have to know
someone you have to have some kind of
referral it's very difficult so don't be
discouraged if you apply to you know the
best companies in the world Microsoft
Apple Google Facebook Etc and you don't
hear anything back I would be more
concerned about trying to get in a
smaller company first getting that stamp
on my resume and then moving up the
ladder later on once I had a bit more
experience now I would also try to get a
little bit creative here and try to look
for jobs in maybe not the standard way
where it's not as competitive and I'll
give you a great example so one of the
students that just came out of my
software development program he actually
landed a job in about 3 weeks after
finishing the program now I interviewed
him and I asked him how did he do this
and he said he actually found it through
Facebook Marketplace he said that he was
looking on Craigslist he was looking at
Facebook Marketplace he was looking in
forums and he was going plac is where
people were asking for developers but
didn't know where to find them through
this he was able to get in contact with
a manager at a small company in Canada
he had an interview and then he got
hired for the job so not a way that I
would think that you'd be able to land a
job but he was creative he did this
super fast and he said that that was
where he was finding the most success
was in these kind of forums and Facebook
groups and places that most people
aren't swarming to and sending a ton of
volume to now of course there's also a
ton of platforms you can use LinkedIn
glass store uh what else do we have here
angel list there's also platform I just
found called well found this is great if
you're applying to startups specifically
which I think are easier to get in the
door with and again just focus on
getting some kind of job the quality of
your first job isn't as important you
just need something so you have that
Real World Experience then you can start
climbing that ladder now the last major
tip I have for you here is apply even if
you don't have all of the requirements a
ton of people get super discourage
because they see you know massive lists
of requirements on tech jobs the reality
is most people writing these job
descript ions aren't in Tech themselves
they're in Human Resources they don't
actually know what's required for the
job and they just list a ton of stuff or
copy other ones online so even if you
don't perfectly match the description
still apply to the job as long as you
meet you know a good amount of the
criteria and you'll be surprised because
a lot of jobs I actually ended up
getting offered I didn't even know some
of the languages that they had on the
list and when it came to the interview
what they were telling me they wanted
versus what was on the job posting was
completely different so ideally at this
point if I did everything I mentioned in
this video and was being strategic I
should have got a few interviews if I
had put out hundreds of applications I
would expect to at least get one two
maybe three interviews and to give you
some perspective here even back in 2019
when I was applying for internships I
would say I was overqualified compared
to most computer science students having
my YouTube channel and all of this kind
of stuff and I still applied to about 90
companies and I only got three
interviews so just to give you some kind
of perspective there like I wasn't
getting a great response right back then
anyways you do need to put in a ton of
volume point is I'm hoping at this point
I would get some interviews so now it's
time for some interview tips or how I
would Ace the interview now first of all
I would go into an interview being
professional a lot of people kind of
dress like tech people they don't get a
haircut before they're not clean they're
not well shaven they're not wearing
maybe a nice dress shirt you don't need
to wear a full suit but at least like
kind of look nice and presentable I
would go in there I would speak with
confidence I would ensure that I let
them know yes I'm fit for this job I
know how to do this I have experience
and I know that I'd be a great match for
the team so many people are really
nervous they're really reserved they're
uming and they're awing they don't know
kind of the typical interview answers so
make sure you rehearse all of those and
you can go in there and be super
confident I would also make sure that I
bring a copy of my resume now I know
this is a little bit outdated but I
still like to do this I would print out
three or four different copies of my
resume in a little folder bring that to
the interview and even if you don't need
to use them it's a great thing to show
that you're coming prepared you're
taking the initiative if there are
multiple people there who haven't seen
your resume you can give it out to them
and of course you can reference your
resume yourself I would also ensure that
anything I say in the interview I back
up with experience and with proof If I
tell someone yes I'm really well
experienced in Python I would say
because I've done this this and this I
built this project I taught this course
I worked on this freelance project I
took this course in University I would
make sure that I always relate things
that I say in the interview back to
major points that I have on my resume
and to experience that I have in real
life I would also ensure that I study up
on the company I know the Mission and
the value statement of that company I
understand maybe who's going to be
interviewing me some key people I know
for example the name of the CEO basic
things like that you definitely don't
want to be caught off guard and the more
research and preparation you can do
beforehand the better it's going to make
you look and the more confident you're
going to feel what I found going into
interviews is that the more preparation
I did it didn't necessarily help me
tremendously in the interview but it
made me feel like I done everything I
needed to do so when I walked in the
room I wasn't anxious I wasn't nervous I
didn't feel like maybe I skipped
something or I didn't do enough prep I
knew that I came as prepared as I
possibly could have and whatever happens
happens that's the mindset I like to go
into things with look I've done whatever
I could I've prepared I spent the time I
put in the hours if I fail I fail
there's nothing more I could have done
if I succeed great then all of it paid
off personally that's my mindset I don't
know that worked for me and just kind of
helped me stay calm in the interviews
which I think is really important so
anyways guys that's it that's what I
would do to land a software engine
internship by no means is this easy by
no means do I guarantee this is going to
work for everyone but this is personally
the strategy I would employ I think this
would definitely give me some level of
success especially if I was targeting
those smaller and midsize companies and
was just trying to get my foot in the
door with that first piece of experience
if you guys enjoyed this video make sure
you leave a like if you want to join
that Dev launch program again there's
only going to be 10 spots so click the
link below enjoying the wait list and I
look forward to seeing you there