everyone knows the software engineering
job market is more competitive than ever
over the past couple of years we've seen
massive layoffs everywhere from the tech
giants like Microsoft and Google to much
smaller companies everyone's been
impacted I mean I've just been laid off
myself I'm afraid we're going to have to
let you go juniors are now competing
with experienced Engineers Outsourcing
is increasing and AI is impacting
everything so does this mean it's game
over should we all just in the towel and
start flipping burgers at the local Mack
D's well not exactly in this video I'm
going to break down the challenges
software engine is face today while they
still hope for the future and talk about
how you can actually thrive in this
rabidly evolving Market let's try that
again and talk about how you can
actually thrive in this rapidly evolving
Market let's get started now the
software engineering job market has been
through a hell of a lot in the past few
years in 2023 alone I think it's
something like over 300 ,000 Tech
workers were laid off and by 2024
another 130,000 jobs were cut of course
every time another layoff happens the
market gets flooded with more and more
Talent creating this vicious death
spiral the effect is particularly being
felt by Junior Engineers as they now
have to compete with sometimes quite
frankly desperate midlevel and Senior
Engineers who also need a job on top of
that companies are increasingly
Outsourcing jobs to lower cost regions
like that in the America India and
Eastern Europe this shift is making it
even harder to secure opportunities in
traditional markets and then of course
there's AI the elephant in the room we
all know that AI tools are automating
routine coding tasks at an unprecedented
Pace but look here's the thing
regardless of AI or not back in 2021 the
industry was in an unsustainable boom I
even heard of Engineers juggling
multiple high-paying jobs and grinding
leak code just to keep jumping companies
for a quick pay bump the fact is it just
couldn't last forever and now we're in
the inevitable downturn I mean think of
other high-paying professions like
doctors or lawyers it takes years of
learning and training and overcoming
barriers to become highly paid in those
fields but anyway regardless of that
remember that after every bubble comes
stabilization while many will inevitably
leave the industry and average salaries
will adjust this is actually good news
for those of us committed to the long
term remember that these Cycles have
happened over and over and over again in
the tech job market and this time will
be no different in fact I think there
are actually a lot of reasons to be very
positive on the tech Market as we head
into 2025 first as absolutely brutal as
it's been we're well into the tech
layoff cycle now layoffs peaked in 2023
with huge numbers of jobs lost and while
2024 did see more Cuts they've been
slowing down month by month historically
these Cycles simply have to bot out and
stabilize at some point and this time
will be no different I firmly believe
that the market will recover it's just a
matter of when fair enough it might not
look like it did before but jobs will
still be there second let's talk about
ai's impact AI is obviously helping
companies produce a lot of code very
quickly but the fact is that the code
being churned out isn't anywhere near
production ready it needs to be reviewed
tested maintained and improved and that
requires skilled developers maintenance
of code is typically much harder than
development itself and AI is just not
suited to this yet once companies put
code out into production and start
charging money for it they have a
responsibility to keep it working if
they want to continue making said money
and that will require developers finally
you've just got to glance at the news to
see that tech companies using Ai and
related Technologies are raising huge
amounts of money right now what does
that money go toward sure some of it
goes to infrastructure rure and
marketing and providing nice lunches for
clients but the huge majority of it is
spent on hiring new talent and keeping
that Talent Happy companies still need
staff and they still need developers now
that we've talked about the challenges
and reasons to stay optimistic let's get
into the most important part of the
video what you can do to stand out and
thrive in the tech job market in 2025
because while the market is competitive
there are clear steps you can take to
position yourself for success
first you simply must start thinking of
yourself as a business if you're lucky
enough to already have an employer start
thinking of them as your main client
with all the tools and AI at your
disposal today you have more power than
ever to create value you simply must use
it whether it's automating tasks solving
tough problems or delivering results
faster you need to show that you're
indispensable but simply if you don't
leverage these tools someone else will
second improve your own skills not just
your coding skills but also problem
solving system design even soft skills
like communication and teamwork it's not
enough to be good enough anymore you
need to actually get good at what you do
whether that means getting I don't know
a kubernetes certification or mastering
Cloud architecture or whatever you're
into invest in yourself now so that when
the market picks up again you'll be
ahead of the curve next and I know some
of you won't want to hear this but you
have to network more look I get it I'm a
massive introvert and I hate talking to
people in real life most of the time but
whether we like it or not 50% of jobs
get filled before they're even posted
these days people love working with
people they already know and trust and
so being one of these people you'll
always have the upper hand if you're
just relying on platforms like LinkedIn
where you can easy apply with just one
click guess what it's just as easy for
everyone else to do that too in fact it
would be pretty trivial to write a
script that will apply for a thousand of
these jobs networking gives you an edge
and it's the only way you'll find these
hidden opportunities before anyone else
does and finally and perhaps most
importantly start building your personal
brand if there's one thing that
Generations Z has taught me is that
standing out is more important than ever
I don't care if it's writing blog posts
creating YouTube videos or sharing your
projects on social media putting
yourself out there will open doors you
didn't even know existed I can
personally testify to this this is
exactly what I've been doing the last
few years even before I got laid off
sharing more about my own projects and
progress online my goal is to encourage
and Inspire others while building my own
brand along the way look I truly believe
we're heading increasingly towards
self-entrepreneurship in Tech with the
right skills you won't need a company as
a middleman anymore clients will hire
you directly as a contractor for
short-term projects allowing both sides
to avoid long-term commitments the
bottom line is this you have more tools
and opportunities at your fingertips
than ever before but it's up to you to
use them think like a business sharpen
your skills Network effectively and
share your journey with the world these
are the steps that will set you apart in
2025 as we wrap up this video I want you
to remember one thing software
engineering still offers incredible
benefits location Freedom work life
balance High salaries the chance to work
on call cool and interesting projects
and a variety of opportunities yes the
industry is evolving the way we find
jobs and even the way we work is
changing likely in ways we can't even
imagine yet but here's the good news if
you're committed to this field you too
have the power to evolve right along
with it I hope you found this video
helpful let me know in the comments
below what your predictions are for the
tech Market in 2025 and what steps
you're planning to take for your future
if you found this helpful please
remember to hit the like button And
subscribe to the channel but that's all
for this video thanks for watching and
I'll see you in the next one