ever dreamed of the freelancer lifestyle
working from home choosing your own
hours well I'm about to ruin that for
you
I've been a freelance software developer
for around two years now and I've been
self-employed since I was 17. over the
past six years I've learned a lot about
working for yourself and it's never what
you expect now if you love programming
and that's all you want to do
freelancing is not for you I actually
only spend around half of my time
writing code the other half is spent
doing marketing client communication
admin the list goes on and it's really
hard to do those things if you don't
love them so if all you want to do is
write code for a living I'd probably
recommend finding a company where you
really like them and the culture making
sure that you really like their product
and then applying for a role there
because that will be so much more
enjoyable than spending half of your
time doing tasks that you don't want to
do another one of those tasks is project
management you might be saying Tom
you're the only person working on this
project it can't be that hard to manage
a project when you're the only person
that there is to manage well as someone
that's hired people in the past I will
say it's so much harder to just manage
yourself because when you get busy it
can become very difficult to prioritize
things especially when you have multiple
projects on the go at one time here's a
really useful tip for dealing with that
you should give your clients access to a
dashboard that allows them to see the
progress of the project so that you
spend less time communicating with them
through email or through WhatsApp like I
said I spend a lot of time communicating
with clients and it will be so much more
if I didn't give them access to a
dashboard so they could just see the
progress instead of asking for it now
when you're working with clients you
should be getting paid for it if you're
not there's a problem sure you can do
some projects to help build your
experience but if they're using it for a
real business case you need to make sure
you're getting paid for it because
otherwise they're just taking advantage
of you and the money that you can earn
as a freelance software developer can be
great but correctly estimating project
budgets and quoting for them can be
tricky especially at the start sometimes
you overestimate how long a project is
going to take you it takes you two weeks
instead of three and you make a little
bit extra money for doing a little bit
less work sometimes you get it bang on
and perfect you've been paid for exactly
what you're worth and sometimes you get
it drastically wrong and you end up
working way more hours than you
initially intended for the project and
the worst part about it is you're not
getting paid any more for it most
Freelancers including myself have done
this before and to be honest it's a fact
of life it's going to happen at some
point so when it does happen don't beat
yourself up too much about it just learn
from it and make sure you can get
through it my advice for avoiding this
kind of situation is to add contingency
to your prices if you think a project is
going to take 100 hours give them a
price for 150 hours because then if the
project does go over by up to 50 hours
you've still made an amount of money
that you're happy with before you start
doing any work as a freelancer you
actually need to land the client
projects and this is where a truth that
really hits home for a lot of people
comes in qualification do not matter I
don't have a degree in computer science
in fact I don't have a degree in
anything and that has never stopped me
from getting any work you see when
clients are making hiring decisions for
Freelancers they don't care about your
qualifications they care about whether
they think you can deliver the work so
actually the most important skill that
you can have as a freelancer is people
skills learn how to sell yourself both
in the forms of online and digital
marketing but also talking to people
face to face you need to convince them
that you are the right person for the
job and being a good communicator is a
massive part of that well everybody
that's it for today's video I hope you
did enjoy if you did please do leave a
like subscribe and hit the Bell icon
thank you ever so much for watching and
I'll see you in the next one